The City Calculator
===================

The city calculator is a "version" of the 2050 Calculator. That is, at heart, it
is an energy model: most of the hard work inside the Calculator is in figuring
out the flows of energy; and most of those calculations are done via little
"driver tree models".

The aim of this note is to clarify what the previous sentence means and to
produce an architecture of the city calculator.

In summary, this note explains the following ideas: "flows", which are the
fundamental units of this model; "activities", which create flows; the
"driver-tree approach"; and finally how the output may be interpreted.

I focus on a single year (eg, 2020). The same model applies to any year.


Context: The 2050 Calculator
----------------------------

Recall that the 2050 Calculator is structured as two main sections. The first
section comprises the collection of "sector sheets". These compute, for each
sector, a set of energy flows. The second section is the set of "yearly balance
sheets". These collect, in one place, the set of all energy flows for a given
year (characterised by fuel type and sector, as it happens).

Common to both sections are the energy flows. A single "flow" is the fundamental
unit of this model.


Flows
-----

A /flow/ is a quantity of energy. It represents the production or consumption of
a particular kind of energy at a particular place and time. For example: the
consumption of a certain amount of petrol by a car travelling 1 km; the
production of a certain amount of heat energy by a condensing boiler; the
"production" of a certain amount of losses by that same boiler.

Flows may be assigned /characteristics/ which classify them. In the 2050
Calculator, there are two kinds of characteristics: sectors and "fuel
types". (Fuel types are also called "energy vectors" in the 2050 Calculator.) 

Note that fuel types include categories not traditionally thought of as fuels,
namely: kinds of service demand (eg, "road transport"), kinds of primary supply
(eg, "wind"), and "losses". These categories must be included in order that the
model obeys the energy balance principle, described below. (They can be thought
of as being equivalent to "nominal accounts" in accounting theory.)

These non-traditional fuel types mean that every sector can be thought of as
engaged in the transformation of energy from one form to another. Those sectors
whose function is to model the primary production of energy can be thought of as
transforming energy from a "primary production" fuel type to a "real" fuel type
(such as coal). Those sectors whose function is to model end-user consumption of
energy can be be throught of as transforming energy from real fuels to a "final
demand" fuel type. 

Fuel types are hierarchical in nature. (For example, "petrol" is a subset of
"liquid hydrocarbon".) The set of all fuel types forms a single hierarchy. Each
flow must be assigned to one element of this heriarchy. Modelling hierarchies is
not entirely trivial, it turns out, but I will ignore that complication here.


Activities (and the energy balance principle)
----------------------------------------------

A sector in the 2050 Calculator is a little model of a particular economic
grouping, such as "passenger transport." These little models are typically very
simplistic: they decompose the economic sector into small, atomic units, each of
which convert energy from one form to another.

For example, the "domestic passenger transport" worksheet unltimately breaks
down into a set of vehicle-technology-distance units, such as car-ICE-km,
bus-HEV-km, rail-diesel-km and so on. Each of these atomic units converts the
particular fuel type for that unit into the final demand for that unit.

We shall call this kind of unit an /activity/. An activity is a "tiny model"
whose sole function is to convert energy from one form to another. More
formally, an activity computes a set of energy flows such that the sum of these
flows is zero. (The rule that the sum of flows must be zero is the "energy
balance principle".) Don't think of the word "activity" in its English sense:
think of it as a label for a certain entity within the model.

It is a design decision of the 2050 Calculator that activities interact with each
other solely through the energy flows, not via other kinds of data. That
stipulation defines, in part, the class of models of which the 2050 Calculator
is an example.

[You may be wondering whether the model will contain innumerable such
activities. After all, if the total distance travelled by cars with internal
combustion engines is 716 bn passenger-km, are we really going to have a model
with 716 bn car-ICE-km activities? Answer: no, the model should clearly just
store one, together with the number 7.16 x 10^11. That is an implementation
detail, however.]

The nice thing about activities is that they may be combined: the sum of two
activities is an activity (and the product of an activity and a number is also
an activity). For example, the car-[technology]-km activities may be aggregated
over all technologies and distances to obtain the "car" activity: this activity
tells you how much energy is consumed by cars, overall. Likewise, the sum of all
activities responsible for passenger transport is the "passenger transport"
sector. In this sense, the meaning of "sector" is simply "combination of
activities."

The next section explains how the model figures out how much of each activiy
is required.


Driver trees
------------

The class of models that we are calling "Calculators" has, I think, two defining
characteristics. The first we have already described -- it is that activities
interact only via their energy flows. The second is about how we populate the
model with those activities.

In principle, we could do this via some economic (or other) optimising model. In
the Calculator, however, we tend to do it by a sort of reverse aggregation
process. 

For example, here is how the passenger transport sector works. To distinguish
between activities and numbers, I'll write the names of activities in angle
brackets. 

First we model the total energy consumption as the energy consumption of a
representative passenger, multiplied by the number of people:

  <passenger-transport> = population x <passenger>

In the above, "<passenger>" means the activity that produces the energy flows
(due to transport) of a representative person. "<passenger-transport>" produces
the total energy flows due to transport. 

Then we write the <passenger> actvitiy as the sum of the modal distances per
person:

  <passenger>  =   distance-by-car x <passenger-km-by-car>
	         + distance-by-bus x <passenger-km-by-bus>
	      	 + distance-by-rail x <passenger-km-by-rail>

Then we convert <passenger-km> to <vehicle-km> by multiplying by the occupancy, eg:

  <passenger-km-by-car> = <car-km> x car-occupancy  
    
Finally, we split <vehicle-km> by technology:

  <car-km> =   fraction-with-ICE x <car-ICE-km>
  	     + fraction-with-PHEV x <car-PHEV-km>
	     + fraction-with-EV x <car-EV-km>
	     + fraction-with-FCV x <car-FCV-km>

[NB: ICE = Internal Combustion Engine; PHEV = Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle;
EV = Electric Vehicle; FCV = Fuel Cell Vehicle]. 

Finally, we have reached activities that are not built up from other activities,
and for which we must simply calculate the energy flows.

In summary, each sector is an aggregation of fundamental
activities. Furthermore, in our models, the weights of each activity are given
"top down": starting with the most aggregated activity, we compute its
disaggregation using simplistic approximations. This arrangement is colloquially
known as a "driver-tree" approach.


Characteristics
---------------

I mentioned earlier that flows have two characteristics in the 2050 Calculator:
fuel type and sector. In the formalism described here, the characteristics are
as follows:

i. "Direction" (either "in" or "out"), which characterisies the physical nature
of the flow: whether it should be thought of as a production or consumption of
energy. 

ii. "Fuel type".

iii. "Sector". In this version, a sector is simply a label attached to a flow,
which characterises something about the activity used to create it. Sectors are
not necessarily strictly hierarchical. For example, one could imagine the sector
"train" appearing in both the "passenger transport" activity and the "freight"
activity.  However, if the activity model follows the driver-tree approach, then
activities impose a natural hierarchy on the sectors (in that some activities
are aggregations of others).

It is required that the sum of all flows corresponding to a particular sector is
zero.


Formalities
-----------

More generally:

A /model/ is a function which takes a set of global assumptions and produces and
activity. 

An activity takes as arguments a set of model parameters and produces:

   i. A set of labelled flows;
   ii. Possibly, a preferred hierarchy for the sector labels;
   iii. Possibly, a set of activity levels (tbd). 




